So let's first look at the effect we want
to create before we set out to create it.
So we want something like this, where we
click and we have the same circle, but
when we lift the mouse pointer, the circle
grows in radius and decreases in opacity.
I've described it earlier, but
this is what it looks like.
So now let's go back and try to do that.
So the radius of the circle is controlled
through the position of the color stop.
If we say 2em's,
it's a much bigger circle.
And we want it to basically start
from 1em and go to ideally 100% so
that we are certain that it
covers our entire button.
If we just use a large number of em's,
it could always end up
needing more than that.
So what we will do is we
are going to use again a p custom
property for
the progression of the animation.
And when the property is 0,
we want to get 1em,
when it's 1, we want to get 100%.
It's just another case
of range mapping really.
So let's define a property for,
The radius, let's say ripple-radius.
And let's use the same technique.
So when p is 1, we want it to be 100%.
And when p is 0,
We want it to be 1em.
And let's add these.
Okay, and let's see.
So with 0,
we get the circle that we already had.
Let's do 0.2 and see what happens.
See the circle is bigger.
And let's do 0.5, even bigger.
So it looks like it's working.
Let's do 1,
it should cover the entire thing.
Fantastic, so
this is already working for the circle.
Now, what else do we want to vary?
We want to vary the opacity of the circle.
So we start with 0.4 and
we want to reach 0.
So let's do ripple-opacity.
Again, we're gonna use calc.
So, When
var p is 1, we want to get 0.
And when p is 0, we want
to get 0.4, right?
And we can actually remove this term
because it's just multiplying by 0.
Now let's try it again,
0 gives us the original circle,
0.2 gives us a larger circle.
0.6 gives us an even larger circle,
but the opacity is
not changing because I haven't
actually applied the var here.
So, let's say ripple-opacity.
Lovely, now that p is 0.6,
we're getting a very faded out circle.
Let's try 0.2 again, let's fad it out.
Let's try 0.
Okay, our original circle.
So this works, but of course,
we don't actually have an animation yet,
because p is just hard-coded,
it's not changing.
So what we really want
to do is set p here,
And when it's active,
we want to get the 1em circle and
the 0.4, and we get those when p is 0.
So we wanna set it to 1 on the main
rule and 0 on the active rule.
And then we wanna animate it,
so we need to register it.
So @property --p syntax:
"<number>"; inherits,
we don't care, we can just say false.
And initial value is 0.
Now we're gonna set a transition.
Let's set it to one second and
let's see what happens.
These actually needs to
be in the main rule,
they shouldn't be applying only
when the button is active,
that's why we don't get anything
when we lift the mouse pointer.
All we want here is
the declaration that sets p to 0.
So now, when we press our mouse pointer,
we get this effect,
and then when we lift it,
we get the effect we wanted.
So we're almost there,
we're halfway there pretty much.
We want the circle to start immediately
when we get our mouse pointer down,
but we do want the animation to
happen when we lift our button up.
So how can we do that?
This has to do with how transitions work.
So the transition right now
is applied on our main rule.
So we get the same transition,
the one second transition,
both when we press the mouse button
down and when we lift it up.
If we only wanted one way,
then we could go there and
override transition duration,
To be 0 seconds.
And let's try that.
So you see now,
the moment I press my mouse pointer down,
I get the circle immediately.
Because the moment I press my mouse
pointer down, the active pseudo
class activates, and the transition is 0,
so I get no transition.
However, once I'm in the active mode,
once I lift my pointer up,
then I'm not in active anymore,
so this doesn't apply anymore.
So now I get the usual one second
that I've specified in the base rule,
so I actually get the transition now.
And you can see how it works,
it's basically variable we wanted.
In Google's version, it's much faster,
but we could do that.
It's just kind of a shame
because now we can't see it and
we've spent all this work on it.
I know that some people might have
questions about performance with these
things, especially since we've used event
delegation on document for many of these.
Event delegation is when you
monitor events on an ancestor,
often even the entire document.
So we monitor events on
pretty much any element,
even new elements that existed after
we registered our event handler.
So that gives you maximum flexibility and
maintainability, but
it can be slower because
we're monitoring everything.
Sometimes, it makes sense to scope
to specific elements that can be
more performant, but it's a tighter
coupling of CSS and JavaScript.
Because you need to know which
elements you're applying,
which elements you will need to
involve in your CSS beforehand.
I would say my personal recommendation
would be for anything other than mouse
move or pointer move, err on flexibility,
it's not triggered that frequently.
For mouse move or
pointer move, it depends.
I would say try to err on flexibility,
measure the performance, adjust if needed.
But in those,
it's more reasonable to err on the side
of having a tighter coupling
to gain in performance.
Again, it depends on the website, it
depends on how many DOM elements you have
in general, how complex the website is.
But mouse move can get quite slow if
you're doing a lot of work there.
So for
events that are triggered very frequently,
it makes sense to limit how many
elements you're monitoring.
So in this case,
we have used range mapping just to avoid
registering a bunch of properties.
We might have mentioned this before,
it can be useful to avoid
registering a ton of properties.